---
layout: post
title: O-O-P
---

**CLASSES
AND OBJECTS ;**

It is a programming style that
is intended to make thinking about programming closer to thinking
about the real world.

Each object is an independent
unit with a unique identity.

Procedural programming where
the program is written as one long procedure, even if it is written
with functions or subroutines to make it more modular and
maintainable, it is really a long piece of code combining both data
and logic together.

How
OOP differs from Procedural programming- Procedural
programming looks at what the program has to do, then lists down all
those functions in a row, however OOP looks at what things are in
this program and what functions must those things perform and what
variables would those things require.

Object Oriented Programming-
the same program would be split into self containing objects(almost
like having several mini- programs.

Each object would rep a diff
pod of the application,and contains its own data and logic and they
would communicate to each other. Eg employees, bank accounts.

Makes you shift about the
objects in your program, not just the process.

**DEFINITIONS;**

Class-
a description/ definition of what something is, though not
necessarily the particular object.

	-Its a well defined idea.(the
idea) IT DEFINES THE ATTRIBUTES AND THE 		BEHAVIOUR

	-Could also represent the
visual aspects of the program ie text box, buttons, windows

	-Also, the invisible side of
the program. Ie, dates and times

Object-
created based on the class. Could be multiple objects based on one
class.

Attributes
and Behaviour-  //most commonly used terms ie (Properties and
Methods)

	-Attributes basically
involves looking at something’s characteristics.

	-Behavious seeks to look at
what it can do.

Methods-
Methods are called, ie those that are written outside the main body
of the main method.

Basic Syntax;

	Within the body, 

				write the method name();

You can call a method as many
times as you require. What basically happens in the background, is
that the code will jump down to where the method has been defined(
when running a method that is)   , executes the code then receeds
back to where it was originally and proceeds to the next line of
code.

**Method
Parameters;**

- Basically data collected
when running a method.

- Usually found within the
parenthesis of the method().

- Other than taking data as
parameters, it could also return data back to you.

- Return keyword is used to
return a value, when calling a method, and you use “ void” it
means that the function has no value to return, whereas when return
is used, it means that a value has to be returned by the function.

Basic Syntax;

			static int Sum(int val1,
int val2){

				}

//return data type is
specified before the name of the method.

//methods can be used to
return a value to what is passed when it is called. Basically takes
in data and work with data.

//might not take a value or
return data.

Code snippet of a code that
takes in data and returns a value.

		Int result = s

		system. Out .println

		//f(x) = x* x;

	static int Square( int x){

	return x * x;

	}

**CREATING
CLASSES AND OBJECTS;**

- In Eclipse;

- Mostly use multiple classes
in one code.

- You create an object for the
method you want to use in another class..

ie, we have 2 classes; apples
and tuna, 

in tuna class, you have a
method called “ SimpleMessage”

and you want to use the method
in tuna class within the apples class.

STEPS;

	Create an object in the
Apples class  of the Tuna class ie 

		tuna TunaObject =  new tuna
();

//Basically allows you to use
all the stuff in the other class

HOW TO USE DIFFERENT CLASSES
IN YOUR MAIN PROGRAM OR METHOD;

HOW
TO USE OBJECTS;

-Basic Syntax

		TunaObject.SimpleMessage();

//Why we use a dot separator
in the method name;

- As much as this class only
has one method in this particular eg, don't forget that it could have
as many methods as it needs. Hence, the dot separator, helps in
identifying the methods that you particularly require. Ie the object
TunaObject the]at you created in the apples class, that could allow
you to use any method within the Tuna class, wants to specifically
run the SimpleMessage method.

As earlier stated, the
attributes of a class are its characteristics.

		Basic Syntax;

			“data type” “
attribute name” ;

HOW
TO CREATE AN OBJECT;

	Basic Syntax;

		“class name” Object-
name” = “new classname”();

		ie

		aircraft WinnyTroy = new
aircraft();

//Class name is sort of a
template for the type of object that we want to create.

ACCESS
MODIFIERS**;**

Are of three types, basically
puts restrictions on how parts of your code can be accessed if it
could be accessed at all.

Public, Private, Protected and
Default.

//Public-  It can be accessed
anywhere in the program so long as you have an instance of this class
		to call it from.

//Private – It is not
visible outside that particular class ie it cant be accessed other
than inside of this 		class

//Protected – it can only be
accessed inside of this package and from sub classes of this class.

- It becomes more clear when
you cover inheritance.

//Default – it can only be
accessed inside of this package.

Understood better after going
through packages.

leave the access modifier out
ie 

		void dosomething(){}

Rates
in terms of access restricted;

1.Private

2.Default- since it can only
be accessed inside this package

3.Protected- since it includes
that particular package as well as subclassses

4.Public- since anything that
has a references to an object.

//Good Programming Practice;

- Set all your variables
within your classes to private,

this helps avoid confusing
them or changing them and then forgetting their original values.

GET
AND SET;

SO create a method that can
relate to that private info . Used through

	Get and Set method;

Diff between get and set
method is;

gets helps us see hidden
information

set helps us change private/
hidden information

set “sets” the variable
to a new value.

	Ie Basic Syntax;

		Obj1.setx( 25);

get method is used to retrieve
information that would otherwise not have been found since it was of
access type private.

CONSTRUCTORS**;**

Special methods that are
invoked when an object is created and are used to initialize.

Basically involves naming a
method, the same way as the class.

Constructor method name should
be the same as the class name.

//it allows you, as soon as
you create an object, to use that value and initialize it to whatever
you want

Basic Syntax;

		public tuna (“ data type”
name){

		}

ie

		public tuna ( String
girlname){

		girlname = name;

		}

VALUE
AND REFERENCE TYPES;

Value data types include;
byte, short, int, long, float, double, boolean, char

reference data types include
all other types

Value type-  passing a copy of
the calue

Reference type- passing a
reference that stores the location in memory of the object.

Meaning, we are able to
manipulate the object itself.

MATH
METHODS;

System.out.printIn
(Math.abs(x));     // gives you how much away from 0 that the figure
is

					//Only takes one value in
the ()

System.out.printIn
(Math.ceil(x));     //Rounds up the number ie 7.7 becomes 8.0

System.out.printIn
(Math.floor(x));     //Rounds down the number ie 8.4 becomes 8.0

System.out.printIn
(Math.max(x));     // can take two parameters, not confined to one
parameter.

					//parameters are
separated by commas.

					//gives you the maximum
of both parameters given.

System.out.printIn
(Math.min(x));	//gives you the min of both parameters.

System.out.printIn
(Math.power(x));   //first parameter is the figure then the 2

nd
parameter gives you the power to muliply by.

System.out.printIn
(Math.sqrt(x));     //gives you the squarerooth of the figure.

OBJECTS;

When every class has the same
value or functions

Doesnt change. And if it does
change, it changes for every variable.

// normally put in caps in
practice, but not really a requirement.

The 4 main concepts of OOP
are;

			encapsulation, inheritance,
polymorphism and abstraction.

ENCAPSULATION;

-Ensures that implementation
details are not visible to users. Ie the variables in once class will
be hidden from other classes, accessible only through the methods of
the current class.

- Data hiding.

To
achieve this, declare the class' variables as
**private **and provide public **setter **and **getter**
methods to modify and view the variables' values.

INHERITANCE; 

- it enables one class to acquire the
properties( methods and variables) of another class.

- Info is placed in a more manageable,
hieracical manner.

- Class inheriting the properties of
another class is known as a subclass.

-Class whose properties are being
inherited is the superclass

-To inherit from a class, use the “
extend ” keyword

-Methods you recreate in the subclasses
will override the inherited methods from the superclass.

- Only public methods can be inherited,
thus, if you have a private method in the superclass, the subclass
cant inherit it, it cant be seen.

POLYMORPHISM;

It refers to the idea of having “many
forms”.

Ie even though it inherits from another
class, it gives you an opportunity to have alternate verions.

Occurs when there is a hierachy of
classes related to each other through inheritance.

Anything, that inherits from the
superclass, can be assigned to the variable name.

Basically polymorphism is one method but
with different implementations.

METHOD OVERRIDING;

As earlier noticed,

a subclass can define a behavior( method
) that's specific to the subclass type, 

meaning that a subclass can implement a
parent class method based on its requirement.

**Rules for Method Overriding:**  
-
Should have the **same **return type and arguments  
- The **access
level** cannot be more restrictive than the overridden method's
access level (Example: If the superclass method is declared public,
the overriding method in the sub class can be neither private or
protected)  
- A method declared **final **or **static **cannot
be overridden  
- If a method cannot be inherited, it cannot be
overridden  
- Constructors cannot be overridden

METHOD OVERLOADING;

Method with the same name but different
arguments.

Also could be known as compile-time
polymorphism.

Occurs when methods have the same name,
but different parameters.

Helpful when you need the same method
functionality for different types o fparameters.

N.B

An overloaded method **must **have a
different argument list; 

the parameters should differ in their
type, number, or both. 

ABSTRACT CLASSES;

 It could be thought of as a class that
represents a generalization and provides functionality but is only
intended to be extended and not instantiated.

Its entire purpose is to be inherited/
extended by other classes.

It lets us define a generalisation, that
can then be shared amongst a group of specialisation.

It provides the outside world with only
essential info, in a process of representing essential features
without implementation details.

The concept of **abstraction **is
that we focus on essential qualities, rather than the specific
characteristics of one particular example.

Abstract class- defined using the “
abstract ” keyword.

N.B - 

		-If a class is declared abstract it
cannot be instantiated (you cannot create objects of that type).

		-- Any class that contains an abstract
method should be defined as abstract.

However, to use an abstract class, you
have to inherit it from another class.

XTERISTICS;

-May contain instances or static
variables/ methods.

- May contain a constructor( though
cannot be called directly)

- May contain abstract methods.( methods
that have no implementation, as these methods would be implemented in
the subclass.)

UML= 

INTERFACES;

An **interface **is a completely
abstract class that contains only abstract methods.

Some specifications for interfaces:  
-
Defined using the **interface **keyword.  
- May contain only
static final variables.  
- Cannot contain a constructor because
interfaces cannot be instantiated.  
- Interfaces can extend other
interfaces.  
- A class can implement any number of interfaces.

Interfaces have the following
properties:  
- An interface is implicitly abstract. You do not need
to use the abstract keyword while declaring an interface.  
- Each
method in an interface is also implicitly abstract, so the abstract
keyword is not needed.  
- Methods in an interface are implicitly
public.  
  
  

N.B

A class can inherit from just one
superclass but can implement multiple interfaces!

Use the **implements
**keyword to use an interface with your class.

CASTING;

**Type casting;**

Assigning a value
of one type to a variable of another type is known as Type Casting.

### Upcasting

  
You can cast an instance of a subclass to its superclass.

EXCEPTIONS;

Its a problem that
occurs during program execution.

They cause abnormal
termination of the program.

**Exception handling**
is a powerful mechanism that handles runtime errors to maintain
normal application flow.  
An exception can occur for many
different reasons. Some examples:  
- A user has entered invalid
data.  
- A file that needs to be opened cannot be found.  
- A
network connection has been lost in the middle of communications.  
-
Insufficient memory and other issues related to physical resources.  
  
  

## Exception
Handling

  
  
Exceptions can be caught using a combination of the **try
**and **catch **keywords.

MULTIPLE EXCEPTIONS;

## throw

  
  
The **throw **keyword allows you to manually generate
exceptions from your methods. 

The throw statement in the method would have to define the type of
exception(s) the method can throw, followed by the corresponding
exception, along with a custom message.

Various available exception types include;

1. IndexOutOfBoundsException

2. IllegalArgumentException

3. ArithmeticException

int div(int a, int b) **throws ArithmeticException** {  
if(b
== 0) {  
**throw new ArithmeticException("Division by
Zero");**  
} else {  
return a / b;  
}  
}

THREADS;

  
Java is a **multi-threaded** programming language

Which basically means that our program can make optimal use of
available resources by running two or more components concurrently,
with each component handling a different task.

You have the capability to sub-divide specific operations within a
single app into individual threads that all run in parrallel.

There are two ways to create a thread,

ie 

1.

Extend the thread class, inherit from the thread class, its run()
method and write the functionality of the thread in the run() method.

Then create a new object in your class and call it start method,
to run your thread.

Every Java thread is prioritized to help the operating system
determine the order in which to schedule threads

2.

  
The other way of creating Threads is **implementing the
Runnable interface**.

Implement the run() method, then create a new object and pass the
runnable class to its constructor.

TYPES OF EXCEPTIONS;

There are exception types ie checked and unchecked(“ runtime ”).

Main Diff is that checked exceptions are checked when compiled
while unchecked exceptions are checked at runtime.
