---
layout: post
title: Concepts of OOP
---

			encapsulation, inheritance,
polymorphism and abstraction.

ENCAPSULATION;

-Ensures that implementation
details are not visible to users. Ie the variables in once class will
be hidden from other classes, accessible only through the methods of
the current class.

- Data hiding.

To
achieve this, declare the class' variables as
**private **and provide public **setter **and **getter**
methods to modify and view the variables' values.

INHERITANCE; 

- it enables one class to acquire the
properties( methods and variables) of another class.

- Info is placed in a more manageable,
hieracical manner.

- Class inheriting the properties of
another class is known as a subclass.

-Class whose properties are being
inherited is the superclass

-To inherit from a class, use the “
extend ” keyword

-Methods you recreate in the subclasses
will override the inherited methods from the superclass.

- Only public methods can be inherited,
thus, if you have a private method in the superclass, the subclass
cant inherit it, it cant be seen.

POLYMORPHISM;

It refers to the idea of having “many
forms”.

Ie even though it inherits from another
class, it gives you an opportunity to have alternate verions.

Occurs when there is a hierachy of
classes related to each other through inheritance.

Anything, that inherits from the
superclass, can be assigned to the variable name.

Basically polymorphism is one method but
with different implementations.

When every class has the same
value or functions

Doesnt change. And if it does
change, it changes for every variable.

// normally put in caps in
practice, but not really a requirement.

METHOD OVERRIDING;

As earlier noticed,

a subclass can define a behavior( method
) that's specific to the subclass type, 

meaning that a subclass can implement a
parent class method based on its requirement.

**Rules for Method Overriding:**  
-
Should have the **same **return type and arguments  
- The **access
level** cannot be more restrictive than the overridden method's
access level (Example: If the superclass method is declared public,
the overriding method in the sub class can be neither private or
protected)  
- A method declared **final **or **static **cannot
be overridden  
- If a method cannot be inherited, it cannot be
overridden  
- Constructors cannot be overridden

METHOD OVERLOADING;

Method with the same name but different
arguments.

Also could be known as compile-time
polymorphism.

Occurs when methods have the same name,
but different parameters.

Helpful when you need the same method
functionality for different types o fparameters.

N.B

An overloaded method **must **have a
different argument list; 

the parameters should differ in their
type, number, or both. 

ABSTRACT CLASSES;

 It could be thought of as a class that
represents a generalization and provides functionality but is only
intended to be extended and not instantiated.

Its entire purpose is to be inherited/
extended by other classes.

It lets us define a generalisation, that
can then be shared amongst a group of specialisation.

It provides the outside world with only
essential info, in a process of representing essential features
without implementation details.

The concept of **abstraction **is
that we focus on essential qualities, rather than the specific
characteristics of one particular example.

Abstract class- defined using the “
abstract ” keyword.

N.B - 

		-If a class is declared abstract it
cannot be instantiated (you cannot create objects of that type).

		-- Any class that contains an abstract
method should be defined as abstract.

However, to use an abstract class, you
have to inherit it from another class.

XTERISTICS;

-May contain instances or static
variables/ methods.

- May contain a constructor( though
cannot be called directly)

- May contain abstract methods.( methods
that have no implementation, as these methods would be implemented in
the subclass.)

UML= 

INTERFACES;

An **interface **is a completely
abstract class that contains only abstract methods.

Some specifications for interfaces:  
-
Defined using the **interface **keyword.  
- May contain only
static final variables.  
- Cannot contain a constructor because
interfaces cannot be instantiated.  
- Interfaces can extend other
interfaces.  
- A class can implement any number of interfaces.

Interfaces have the following
properties:  
- An interface is implicitly abstract. You do not need
to use the abstract keyword while declaring an interface.  
- Each
method in an interface is also implicitly abstract, so the abstract
keyword is not needed.  
- Methods in an interface are implicitly
public.  
  
  

N.B

A class can inherit from just one
superclass but can implement multiple interfaces!

Use the **implements
**keyword to use an interface with your class.